Gorry's ECN rewrite (#4059)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

## Explicit Congestion Notification {#ecn}

QUIC endpoints can use Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) {{!RFC3168}} to
detect and respond to network congestion.  ECN allows an endpoint to set an ECT
codepoint in the ECN field of an IP packet. A network node can then indicate
congestion by setting the CE codepoint in the ECN field instead of dropping the
packet {{?RFC8087}}.  Endpoints react to reported congestion by reducing their
sending rate in response, as described in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

To enable ECN, a sending QUIC endpoint first determines whether a path supports

> ECN marking and whether reports the ECN value in received IP headers; see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ECN marking and whether the peer reports the ECN values in received IP headers; see
```

{{ecn-validation}}.

### ECN Counts

Use of ECN requires the receiving endpoint to read the ECN codepoint from an IP
packet, which is not possible on all platforms. If an endpoint does not
implement ECN support or does not have access to received ECN codepoints, it
does not report ECN counts for packets it receives.

Even if an endpoint does not set an ECT codepoint on packets it sends, the
endpoint MUST provide feedback about ECN codepoints it receives, if these are
accessible.  Failing to report the ECN counts will cause the sender to disable
use of ECN for packets to this receiver.

On receiving a QUIC packet with an ECT(0), ECT(1) or CE codepoint, an
ECN-enabled endpoint accesses the ECN codepoint from the enclosing IP packet and
increases the corresponding ECT(0), ECT(1), or CE count, These ECN counts are
included in subsequent ACK frames; see {{generating-acks}} and {{frame-ack}}.

Each packet number space maintains separate acknowledgement state and separate
ECN counts.  Coalesced packets (see {{packet-coalesce}}) carry several QUIC

> packets that share the same IP header.  The ECN count for the ECN codepoint

Reviewer 2: Perhaps "coalesced QUIC packets". Also "ECN counts" (plural, since different PN spaces).

received in the associated IP header are incremented once for each QUIC packet,
not for the enclosing IP packet.

For example, if one each of an Initial, 0-RTT, Handshake, and 1-RTT QUIC packet
are coalesced, the corresponding counts for the Initial and Handshake packet

> number space will be incremented by one and the counts for the application data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number spaces will be incremented by one each and the counts for the application data
```

> packet number space will be increased by two.

Reviewer 3: That was my question: do we specify correctly that the sender has to correct for double-counting?

An ECN count is not incremented when the received IP packet does not results in
a QUIC packets being processed.  A QUIC packet detected by a receiver as a
duplicate also does not increase an ECN count; see {{security-ecn}} for relevant
security concerns.

### ECN Validation {#ecn-validation}

It is possible for faulty network devices to corrupt or erroneously drop packets

> that set an ECN codepoint.  To provide robust connectivity in the presence of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that carry an ECN codepoint.  To provide robust connectivity in the presence of
```

Reviewer 4: Doesn't every IP packet carry an ECN code point. Maybe we need to say ECT(0) or ECT(1) code point then?

Reviewer: Or a non-zero ECN codepoint?

> such devices, an endpoint validates the ECN counts for each network path  and

Reviewer 3: This needs more explanation because you say first something about "drops" and the "validate ECN counts" but to check for drops you need to detect loss of ECT marked packet which is not really discussed here.

Author: This is introduction.  The explanation you seek follows.

Reviewer 3: I just thought the two sentences don't fit together because the first talks about corrupt and drop but the second sentence only talk about validating counts and not about checking on loss. This is an editorial comment.

disables use of ECN on that path if errors are detected.

To perform ECN validation for a new path:

> * The endpoint SHOULD set the ECT(0) codepoint in the IP header of early

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The endpoint MUST set the ECT(0) codepoint in the IP header of early
```
Can't validate if you don't set it.

Reviewer: That's fine, too.

  outgoing packets sent on a new path to the peer ({{!RFC8311}}).

> * The endpoint SHOULD monitor whether all packets sent with an ECT codepoint are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The endpoint MUST monitor whether all packets sent with an ECT codepoint are
```
Can't validate if you don't monitor.

>   eventually deemed lost (Section 6 of {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}), deeming this as an
>   indication that ECN validation has failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  eventually deemed lost (Section 6 of {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}), indicating
  that ECN validation has failed.
```

To reduce the chances of misinterpreting loss of packets dropped by a faulty
network element, an endpoint could set an ECT codepoint for only the first ten
outgoing packets on a path, or for a period of three RTTs, whichever occurs

> first.

Reviewer: More needs to be said here about why this might be beneficial.

Reviewer 4: This mechanism was there already, so it wasn't my idea. When I edited,  I didn't see where it did hard - nor did I see benefit - so is it needed?

Reviewer 4: @mirjak - What do you suggest (remove this text)?

Reviewer 3: I argued in another discussion already that we should just recommend to mark all packets as ECT(0) until validation fails as this case where packet get dropped is basically not existence anymore. However, this was not accepted as people felt this approach would not increase implementation complexity. I still think the text should note that this is a really rare case and I had an editorial PR for that that was also not expected, so I would propose anything again. Just wanted to state my opinion...

Reviewer 4: I think we all need to find text we can agree upon. Here is a proposal:

"If an endpoint has cause to expect that packets setting an ECT codepoint are being dropped by faulty network element, the endpoint could set an ECT codepoint for only the first ten outgoing packets on a path, or for a period of three RTTs. If an endpoint then discovers all non-zero ECN codepoints fail to be delivered, it can assume the path did not support ECN.

Other methods of probing paths for ECN support are possible,..."

Reviewer 3: Looks good to me!

Reviewer 3: I don't think your rewording did change anything from the original text.

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I think your wording is fine. I looked at this text early in the same section which still seems to indicate that dropping is a real problem:

```
It is possible for faulty network devices to corrupt or erroneously drop
 packets that carry a non-zero ECN codepoint. To ensure connectivity in the
 presence of such devices, an endpoint validates the ECN counts for each network
 path and disables use of ECN on that path if errors are detected.
```

Reviewer 4: I agree,  and suggest this sentence can now be removed, and is now covered by the clarified later sentence: "It is possible for faulty network devices to corrupt or erroneously drop packets that carry a non-zero ECN codepoint."

An endpoint thus attempts to use ECN and validates this for each new connection,
when switching to a server's preferred address, and on active connection
migration to a new path.  {{ecn-alg}} describes one possible algorithm.

Other methods of probing paths for ECN support are possible, as are different
marking strategies. Implementations MAY use other methods defined in RFCs; see
{{?RFC8311}}. Implementations that use the ECT(1) codepoint need to

> perform ECN validation using the reported ECT(1) counts.

Reviewer: This whole ECN text needs to make up its mind on whether it wants to specify that ECT(0) should be used, or if it wants to allow ECT(0) or ECT(1). At the moment, it's a mix. And if it wants to allow both, some words need to be added whether an implementation should pick one statically or randomly or whatnot.

#### Receiving ACK Frames with ECN Counts {#ecn-ack}

> Erroneous application of CE-marks by the network can result in degraded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Erroneous application of ECN-CE markings by the network can result in degraded
```

connection performance.  An endpoint that receives an ACK frame with ECN counts
therefore validates the counts before using them. It performs this validation by
comparing newly received counts against those from the last successfully
processed ACK frame. Any increase in the ECN counts is validated based on the
ECN markings that were applied to packets that are newly acknowledged in the ACK
frame.

If an ACK frame newly acknowledges a packet that the endpoint sent setting

> either the ECT(0) or ECT(1) codepoint, ECN validation fails if the ECN counts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
either the ECT(0) or ECT(1) codepoint, ECN validation fails if the corresponding ECN counts
```

are not present in the ACK frame. This check detects a network element that
zeroes the ECN field or a peer that is unable to access ECN the markings.

ECN validation also fails if the sum of the increase in ECT(0) and ECN-CE counts
is less than the number of newly acknowledged packets that were originally sent
with an ECT(0) marking.  Similarly, ECN validation fails if the sum of the
increases to ECT(1) and ECN-CE counts is less than the number of newly
acknowledged packets sent with an ECT(1) marking.  These checks can detect

> remarking of ECN CE-markings by the network.

Author: I know that "remarking" is likely a term of art, but it is also a word with a completely different meaning.  I think we should avoid it.

Reviewer 2: "These checks can detect network elements that overwrite ECN-CE markings with an ECT(0) or ECT(1) codepoint."

Reviewer 4: I'm OK with a change of word, but the checks only detect some changes to the ECN-Field. They can't detect rewriting of a CE-Marking back to ECT(0) (for instance when ECT(0) was sent), so we should be careful to avoid giving that impression..

> remarking of ECN CE-markings by the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
remarking of ECN-CE markings by the network.
```

An endpoint could miss acknowledgements for a packet when ACK frames are lost.
It is therefore possible for the total increase in the ECT(0), ECT(1), and
ECN-CE counts to be greater than the number of packets acknowledged in an ACK
frame.  This is why ECN counts are permitted to be larger than the value

> corresponding to the largest acknowledged packet number.

Reviewer 2: The old text makes sense to me, but I don't understand this proposed text. What value corresponding to the largest acknowledged PN is this text talking about?

Reviewer 4: (I couldn't clearly understand the old text in the old context... but expect the intention was fine.) Could someone propose a new sentence following the structure of the old one?

Reviewer 4: I think the original text was this - I wouldn't object to using these words, but I think they could be clearer: "This is why counts are permitted to be larger than might be accounted for by newly acknowledged packets."

Reviewer 3: Didn't we also discuss a check were all packets get marked as CE (including non-ECT packets)? That's actually the only check that is basically implemented today in TCP (checking if the SYN is CE which should be non-ECT).

Reviewer 4: @mirjak - Can you suggest what text you think is missing, so we can complete the edit?

Reviewer 3: This might be more than an edit but I guess there could be another case, that checks e.g. after one RTT if all packets got CE marked and then fails validation.

> Out of order processing of the ECN counts can result in a validation failure.

Reviewer: What does "out of order processing of the ECN counts" mean?

increases to ECT(1) and ECN-CE counts is less than the number of newly
acknowledged packets sent with an ECT(1) marking.  These checks can detect
remarking of ECN-CE markings by the network.

An endpoint could miss acknowledgements for a packet when ACK frames are lost.
It is therefore possible for the total increase in ECT(0), ECT(1), and ECN-CE
counts to be greater than the number of packets that are newly acknowledged by
an ACK frame. This is why ECN counts are permitted to be larger than the value
corresponding to the largest acknowledged packet number.

Validating ECN counts from reordered ACK frames can result in failure. An
endpoint MUST NOT fail ECN validation as a result of processing an ACK frame
that does not increase the largest acknowledged packet number.

ECN validation can fail if the received total count for either ECT(0) or ECT(1)
exceeds the total number of packets sent with each corresponding ECT codepoint.
In particular, validation will fail when an endpoint receives a non-zero ECN
count corresponding to an ECT codepoint that it never applied.  This check
detects when packets are remarked to ECT(0) or ECT(1) in the network.

#### ECN Validation Outcomes

> If validation fails, then the endpoint MUST disable ECN. It stops setting the

Reviewer 3: I don't think this should be a MUST. If normative language is needed I guess it should be a SHOULD with a warning that remarking by the network can conceal congestion. I would however rather simply not use normative language here.

Reviewer 4: I think it is a MUST, until the next round of validation starts. The endpoint shouldn't continue to set ECT(?) and not be able to respond when CE is marked.

Reviewer 2: This is what the original text said, so I think the intent is that of a MUST.

## Explicit Congestion Notification {#ecn}

QUIC endpoints can use Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) {{!RFC3168}} to
detect and respond to network congestion.  ECN allows an endpoint to set an ECT
codepoint in the ECN field of an IP packet. A network node can then indicate
congestion by setting the CE codepoint in the ECN field instead of dropping the
packet {{?RFC8087}}.  Endpoints react to reported congestion by reducing their
sending rate in response, as described in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

To enable ECN, a sending QUIC endpoint first determines whether a path supports
ECN marking and whether the peer reports the ECN values in received IP headers;
see {{ecn-validation}}.

> ### ECN Counts

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Reporting ECN Counts
```

Use of ECN requires the receiving endpoint to read the ECN field from an IP
packet, which is not possible on all platforms. If an endpoint does not

> implement ECN support or does not have access to received ECN field, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implement ECN support or does not have access to received ECN fields, it
```

does not report ECN counts for packets it receives.

Even if an endpoint does not set an ECT field on packets it sends, the endpoint
MUST provide feedback about ECN markings it receives, if these are accessible.
Failing to report the ECN counts will cause the sender to disable use of ECN

> for packets to this receiver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for this connection.
```

On receiving an IP packet with an ECT(0), ECT(1) or CE codepoint, an
ECN-enabled endpoint accesses the ECN field and increases the corresponding
ECT(0), ECT(1), or CE count. These ECN counts are included in subsequent ACK
frames; see {{generating-acks}} and {{frame-ack}}.

Each packet number space maintains separate acknowledgement state and separate
ECN counts.  Coalesced QUIC packets (see {{packet-coalesce}}) share the same IP

> header so the ECN counts are incremented once for each QUIC packet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
header so the ECN counts are incremented once for each coalesced QUIC packet.
```

For example, if one each of an Initial, Handshake, and 1-RTT QUIC packet are
coalesced into a single UDP datagram, the ECN counts for all three packet

> number spaces will be incremented by one each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number spaces will be incremented by one each, based on the ECN field of the single IP header.
```

> number spaces will be incremented by one each.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
number spaces will be incremented by one each.  Due to when keys are discarded, it's extremely unlikely a packet with all 4 types will arrive in the same datagram, but this forms a complete example.
```

Author: Isn't this based on old text?  This example lists three types only, which is possible (our stack can do three at the server in some cases).

ECN counts are only incremented when QUIC packets from the received IP
packet are processed. As such, duplicate QUIC packets are not processed and
do not increase ECN counts; see {{security-ecn}} for relevant security
concerns.

### ECN Validation {#ecn-validation}

It is possible for faulty network devices to corrupt or erroneously drop
packets that carry a non-zero ECN codepoint. To ensure connectivity in the
presence of such devices, an endpoint validates the ECN counts for each network
path and disables use of ECN on that path if errors are detected.

To perform ECN validation for a new path:

* The endpoint sets an ECT(0) codepoint in the IP header of early outgoing
  packets sent on a new path to the peer ({{!RFC8311}}).

* The endpoint monitors whether all packets sent with an ECT codepoint are
  eventually deemed lost (Section 6 of {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}), indicating
  that ECN validation has failed.

If an endpoint has cause to expect that IP packets with an ECT codepoint might

> be dropped by faulty network element, the endpoint could set an ECT codepoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be dropped by a faulty network element, the endpoint could set an ECT codepoint
```

for only the first ten outgoing packets on a path, or for a period of three
RTTs. If all packets marked with non-zero ECN codepoints are subsequently lost,
it can disable marking on the assumption that the marking causes in loss.

An endpoint thus attempts to use ECN and validates this for each new connection,
when switching to a server's preferred address, and on active connection
migration to a new path.  {{ecn-alg}} describes one possible algorithm.

Other methods of probing paths for ECN support are possible, as are different
marking strategies. Implementations MAY use other methods defined in RFCs; see
{{?RFC8311}}. Implementations that use the ECT(1) codepoint need to
perform ECN validation using the reported ECT(1) counts.

#### Receiving ACK Frames with ECN Counts {#ecn-ack}

> Erroneous application of ECN-CE markings by the network can result in degraded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Erroneous application of CE markings by the network can result in degraded
```

connection performance.  An endpoint that receives an ACK frame with ECN counts
therefore validates the counts before using them. It performs this validation by
comparing newly received counts against those from the last successfully
processed ACK frame. Any increase in the ECN counts is validated based on the
ECN markings that were applied to packets that are newly acknowledged in the ACK
frame.

> If an ACK frame newly acknowledges a packet that the endpoint sent setting
> either the ECT(0) or ECT(1) codepoint, ECN validation fails if the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an ACK frame newly acknowledges a packet that the endpoint sent with
either the ECT(0) or ECT(1) codepoint set, ECN validation fails if the
```

corresponding ECN counts are not present in the ACK frame. This check detects a

> network element that zeroes the ECN field or a peer that is unable to access
> ECN the markings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
network element that zeroes the ECN field or a peer that does not report 
ECN markings.
```

## Explicit Congestion Notification {#ecn}

QUIC endpoints can use Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) {{!RFC3168}} to
detect and respond to network congestion.  ECN allows an endpoint to set an ECT
codepoint in the ECN field of an IP packet. A network node can then indicate
congestion by setting the CE codepoint in the ECN field instead of dropping the
packet {{?RFC8087}}.  Endpoints react to reported congestion by reducing their
sending rate in response, as described in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

To enable ECN, a sending QUIC endpoint first determines whether a path supports
ECN marking and whether the peer reports the ECN values in received IP headers;
see {{ecn-validation}}.

### ECN Counts

> Use of ECN requires the receiving endpoint to read the ECN codepoint from an IP

Reviewer 2: Perhaps the following makes it easier? "requires the sending endpoint to write an ECN codepoint to IP headers and the receiving endpoint to read the ECN ..."

> Use of ECN requires the receiving endpoint to read the ECN codepoint from an IP

Reviewer 5: I was also unclear on what "Use of ECN" means, so I wanted to specify that as well.

> Use of ECN requires the receiving endpoint to read the ECN codepoint from an IP

Author: This section is about feedback only, so I think that it is OK to only talk about reading the markings.

> Use of ECN requires the receiving endpoint to read the ECN codepoint from an IP

Reviewer 4: Can I suggest: /To enable the congestion controller to react to CE-marked packets, the sender needs to be able to set an ECT codepoint in the IP header and the receiver needs to be able to read the ECN field from an IP packet./
...i.e.,  removing /in order/ ... /ECN code point/ is the /ECN-field/ or name the code point value(s).

packet, which is not possible on all platforms. If an endpoint does not
implement ECN support or does not have access to received ECN codepoints, it
does not report ECN counts for packets it receives.

Even if an endpoint does not set an ECT codepoint on packets it sends, the
endpoint MUST provide feedback about ECN codepoints it receives, if these are
accessible.  Failing to report the ECN counts will cause the sender to disable
use of ECN for packets to this receiver.

On receiving a QUIC packet with an ECT(0), ECT(1) or CE codepoint, an

> ECN-enabled endpoint accesses the ECN codepoint from the enclosing IP packet and

Reviewer 4: /ECN codepoint/ECN field/

> ECN-enabled endpoint accesses the ECN codepoint from the enclosing IP packet and

Author: Is this throughout?  Because we have lots of use that should be "ECN field" if that is the case.

> increases the corresponding ECT(0), ECT(1), or CE count, These ECN counts are

Author: ```suggestion
increases the corresponding ECT(0), ECT(1), or CE count. These ECN counts are
```

included in subsequent ACK frames; see {{generating-acks}} and {{frame-ack}}.

Each packet number space maintains separate acknowledgement state and separate
ECN counts.  Coalesced QUIC packets (see {{packet-coalesce}}) share the same IP
header.  The ECN counts for the ECN codepoint received in the associated IP
header are incremented once for each QUIC packet.

> For example, if one each of an Initial, 0-RTT, Handshake, and 1-RTT QUIC packet

Author: That's true, except that this invalidates the other part of this paragraph...  This needs more thought.

> For example, if one each of an Initial, 0-RTT, Handshake, and 1-RTT QUIC packet

Reviewer 5: Ok, happy to fix this in a separate PR if that makes sense?

> For example, if one each of an Initial, 0-RTT, Handshake, and 1-RTT QUIC packet

Reviewer 5: I think this is technically legal, so I'm suggesting a note about how it's extremely unlikely.

are coalesced, the corresponding counts for the Initial and Handshake packet
number spaces will be incremented by one each and the counts for the
application data packet number space will be increased by two.

An ECN count is not incremented when no QUIC packets from the received IP
packet are processed. A QUIC packet detected by a receiver as a duplicate also

> does not increase an ECN count; see {{security-ecn}} for relevant security

Reviewer 2: Do we define what "processed" means? We probably should.

concerns.

### ECN Validation {#ecn-validation}

It is possible for faulty network devices to corrupt or erroneously drop
packets that carry a non-zero ECN codepoint. To ensure connectivity in the
presence of such devices, an endpoint validates the ECN counts for each network
path and disables use of ECN on that path if errors are detected.

To perform ECN validation for a new path:

* The endpoint sets an ECT(0) codepoint in the IP header of early outgoing
  packets sent on a new path to the peer ({{!RFC8311}}).

* The endpoint monitors whether all packets sent with an ECT codepoint are
  eventually deemed lost (Section 6 of {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}), indicating
  that ECN validation has failed.

> If an endpoint has cause to expect that IP packets with an ECT codepoint might

Reviewer 2: This isn't a departure from existing text -- see lines 3953-3956 in the old text.

> If an endpoint has cause to expect that IP packets with an ECT codepoint might

Reviewer 4: So, I’m going to chime-in here. Indeed it was in the “original” text, which is why I included this. However, we now have several people (me included) who doubt this is yet correct, so here are my thoughts:

(1)  I think it *is* important to be robust and describe how the protocol falls back in the corner case where the path drops IP packets with a non-zero ECN field - and we should very clearly say this.
(2) I think this can actually happen, but we should *not* make it sound like this often happens in general. I’m confident this is not “normal”.
(3) If we need to *measure* the path characteristic, using 10 packets seems a good test to me. However, as a fall back detection mechanism in a transport protocol this seems odd to stop using ECN after 10 packets when we expect that ECT is forwarded. Note: The text says {{ecn-ack}} says 10, the current text does not.

So.... This is a proposed change: We seem to be converging on clear text, would it be possible to remove the "10 packets" and revise this mechanism to say that the ECN counts need to increment, and pathological loss with no incrementing of counts is an indication that the sender should become “failed” for this connection? I think the text already virtually says this.

> If an endpoint has cause to expect that IP packets with an ECT codepoint might

Reviewer 2: "Pathological loss" isn't going to be good enough as a mechanism, and there's a rathole waiting there to define precisely what "pathological" means. We chose 10 packets based on the IW, and also because we wanted to start somewhere and then change the mechanism as we learned more through experience.

I suggest that we don't muddle this particular (large) PR with an additional, potentially-contentious discussion about a mechanism change.

> If an endpoint has cause to expect that IP packets with an ECT codepoint might

Reviewer 4: I do like Jana's proposal to not muddle this particular (large) PR with this "issue". Would others agree to finalise the PR and then discuss this as a separate topic - afterwards?

> If an endpoint has cause to expect that IP packets with an ECT codepoint might

Reviewer 3: I think we discussed this all ready once. I'm fine with 10 packet as it's the initial window (but maybe that's what we should say), however, given the result is the same I would rather state it as enable ECT marking and if all packet of your first flight are lost validation fails and you disable. Describing this specifically as probably makes it just sounds more complicated that it is.

> If an endpoint has cause to expect that IP packets with an ECT codepoint might

Reviewer 5: The github diff didn't line up well, hence my confusion.  The way this is described still seems a bit unrealistic to me, but I can see this PR doesn't substantively change it, so I'm fine with that.

be dropped by faulty network element, the endpoint could set an ECT codepoint
for only the first ten outgoing packets on a path, or for a period of three
RTTs. If all packets marked with non-zero ECN codepoints are subsequently lost,
it can disable marking on the assumption that the marking causes in loss.

> An endpoint thus attempts to use ECN and validates this for each new connection,
> when switching to a server's preferred address, and on active connection
> migration to a new path.  {{ecn-alg}} describes one possible algorithm.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An endpoint negotiates ECN for each new connection or new path.
{{ecn-alg}} describes one possible algorithm.
```

Author: I don't want to say negotiates.  And I'm not sure that we need the extreme economy you propose otherwise.

Reviewer 4: I also think the original is much clearer.

Other methods of probing paths for ECN support are possible, as are different
marking strategies. Implementations MAY use other methods defined in RFCs; see
{{?RFC8311}}. Implementations that use the ECT(1) codepoint need to
perform ECN validation using the reported ECT(1) counts.

#### Receiving ACK Frames with ECN Counts {#ecn-ack}

Erroneous application of ECN-CE markings by the network can result in degraded
connection performance.  An endpoint that receives an ACK frame with ECN counts
therefore validates the counts before using them. It performs this validation by
comparing newly received counts against those from the last successfully
processed ACK frame. Any increase in the ECN counts is validated based on the
ECN markings that were applied to packets that are newly acknowledged in the ACK
frame.

If an ACK frame newly acknowledges a packet that the endpoint sent setting
either the ECT(0) or ECT(1) codepoint, ECN validation fails if the
corresponding ECN counts are not present in the ACK frame. This check detects a
network element that zeroes the ECN field or a peer that is unable to access
ECN the markings.

> ECN validation also fails if the sum of the increase in ECT(0) and ECN-CE counts

Reviewer 5: undo

```suggestion
ECN validation also if the sum of the increase in ECT(0) and ECN-CE counts
```

Reviewer 2: What are you undo'ing?

is less than the number of newly acknowledged packets that were originally sent
with an ECT(0) marking.  Similarly, ECN validation fails if the sum of the
increases to ECT(1) and ECN-CE counts is less than the number of newly
acknowledged packets sent with an ECT(1) marking.  These checks can detect

> remarking of ECN-CE markings by the network.

Reviewer 5: remarking and removal are completely different and I believe removal is correct.  I'm unsure what's meant by remarking.

```suggestion
removal of ECN-CE markings by the network.
```

Reviewer 2: Remarking means that the network marks the bits to something else. The point here is that something in the  network marked the bits to CE, and now another element is remarking it to something else. Perhaps "erasing of ECN-CE markings"?

Reviewer 5: Something to indicate the bits were cleared is important, as the protocol can detect marking of packet that shouldn't be marked in most cases.

Reviewer 5: If I'm reading correctly, the preceding two sentences describe how to detect if ECN bits have been set to 0.  Detecting remarking would indicate to me that you can also detect a bit that was 0 set to 1, but the next paragraph explains why it's ok for the counts to be larger than expected.

That being said, it sounds like people like the word 'remarked' when talking about ECN, so I'm fine to keep it as is.

An endpoint could miss acknowledgements for a packet when ACK frames are lost.
It is therefore possible for the total increase in ECT(0), ECT(1), and ECN-CE
counts to be greater than the number of packets that are newly acknowledged by

> an ACK frame. This is why ECN counts are permitted to be larger than the value
> corresponding to the largest acknowledged packet number.

Reviewer 5: This is unfortunately incorrect.  One could in theory start with a packet number of 1 million and it should not affect correctness.

```suggestion
an ACK frame. This is why ECN counts are permitted to be larger than the total
number of acknowledged packets within a packet number space.
```

Author: How about:

```suggestion
an ACK frame. This is why ECN counts are permitted to be larger than the total
number of packets that are acknowledged.
```
I don't think we need to say "packet number space" again here.

Validating ECN counts from reordered ACK frames can result in failure. An
endpoint MUST NOT fail ECN validation as a result of processing an ACK frame
that does not increase the largest acknowledged packet number.

> ECN validation can fail if the received total count for either ECT(0) or ECT(1)

Reviewer 5: Can fail?  Isn't it required to fail?

Reviewer 2: This is a reword of lines 3992-3996. I don't remember why this was written as a MAY earlier (as against a MUST, or just "fails"), but the new language is changing phrasing to "can" from "MAY". @martinthomson might remember why this isn't a failure requirement.

exceeds the total number of packets sent with each corresponding ECT codepoint.
In particular, validation will fail when an endpoint receives a non-zero ECN
count corresponding to an ECT codepoint that it never applied.  This check

> detects when packets are remarked to ECT(0) or ECT(1) in the network.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
detects when packets are marked ECT(0) or ECT(1) by the network.
```

Reviewer 2: "Remarked" is important here, since it means that the endpoint marked packets as ECT(0) or ECT(1), and the network remarked it to one of those.
